Like many others, I got hooked into Formula One by Netflix's Drive to Survive. The show is responsible for an astounding [40% increase](https://theathletic.com/4402239/2023/04/13/f1-formula-one-drive-to-survive-ratings/) in race viewership between only the fourth and fifth seasons! So if you're like me, you were drawn in by not only the strategy of racing but the human component as well. Formula One includes not only drivers but team principals, owners and countless support staff from all over the world. One of the questions that has been raised often but not answered in an appreciable way, is what, if any hometrack advantage exists for drivers. I set out to answer that question with a capstone project for [Coursera's Google Data Analytics certification](https://coursera.org/share/fba6d2ca991e9cf820aa8fdb84a3ed8d). 

One of the beauties of F1 is how much data exists for every race, and how many different ways that data can be used to gain insights into the sport. Rather than try to reinvent the wheel, I found the [dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rohanrao/formula-1-world-championship-1950-2020) I needed on kaggle. From there, I had my choice of tools, all of which I became familiar with through the Coursera program. I chose to use R programming and posit.cloud to clean, organize and normalize my data into dataframes. Before I get into that, a quick crash course on F1 rules and race formats:

Formula One is a series of races held throughout the world. Though the number of races can change year to year, there are many that are considered classics and unlikely to be removed from the circuit. Think of Monaco and you likely think Formula One without being prompted. Then, there are races such as Las Vegas, which will be held in November 2023 for the first time since 1984.

10 teams field two drivers each for every grand prix, and must first complete a qualification to determine their starting position in the race. While there are countless more rules that can affect penalties and change a driver's starting position, I won't get into that here. For each race, points are awarded to the top ten drivers. If a driver does not complete the race, this is referred to as a "DNF" - Did Not Finish. For the purposes of answering my question - What is the hometrack advantage in F1 - I filtered the dataset so that only races that were completed counted towards a driver's average. In other words, failing to complete a race did not impact the final results of my analysis. I also filtered out any nationalities for which less than five home races occurred. Ideally, the sample size would be larger, and more nationalities represented, but the only way to get meaningful data is to limit to a sample size of at least five. The results in the attached visual are an average of drivers from each nation's final position, ranked between 1 and 20.

This reduced the field to 11 nations represented in races between 2000-2023. I used Excel to create the attached table, showing the relative advantage or disadvantage each group demonstrated in races for that time period. To my surprise, only about half of that group demonstrated any hometrack advantage at all, and of those, only one had a significant advantage - Mexico. Overall, in 5,421 races between 2000-2023, hometrack advantage across all participating nationalities is a mere 0.14 positions higher than away track final positions for the same group.
